# FEP 1: `fan build` command line tool

    Author:   Andy Frank
    Status:   Active
    Created:  10-Sep-2018

## Summary

The `fan build` tool is designed to simplify starting new Fantom projects, as
well as handle boiler-plate and scaffolding-type code and directory generation.

## Goals

 * Create a new command line tool to:
    - Stub a new `PathEnv` project directory and supporting files
    - Stub a new pod source tree and supporting files
 * Officially recommend new projects be created in their own `PathEnv`
 * Enhance `docIntro` chapter to utilize `fan build` in examples

## Non-Goals

This proposal does not attempt to formalize the role and function of the
`fan.props` file outside of creating a `PathEnv`.

## Motivation

The default behavior of Fantom is to install compiled pods into the global
`lib/` folder. However most modern projects utilize `PathEnv` to organize their
code separately. While the processes for accomplishing this are documented,
this is not explicitly recommended, nor is there any comprehensive examples.

A lesser problem is there exists a fair amount of boilerplate to create both
new `PathEnv` folders and creating new source trees for pods within these
projects. This results in either copy-and-pasting files from other projects,
and/or setting up IDE macros.

This proposal aims to solve both problems by introducing a new command line
tool that is easy to understand and use for both beginner and expert users.

In addition, several new FEP's will depend on `PathEnv` configuration, so this
is a foundational FEP for future Fantom enhancements.

<!--BREAK-->

## Description

A new `build::Main` class will be created with three commands:

    # create new PathEnv and pod source tree
    fan build init <pod-name>

    # create new PathEnv for a multi-pod project
    fan build initenv <env-name>

    # create a new pod source tree
    fan build initpod <pod-name>

It was considered whether these commands should be created in a new top-level
pod (such as `init`), which could support future functionality and possibly
APIs for adding features downstream.

That remains a viable path, however, it is outside the scope of this FEP. This
enhancement is focused on adding only the core needs to bootstrap new Fantom
projects. By bundling these tools in the `build` pod we allow both new and
third party tools space to create, enhance (and even deprecate) the standard
init tools.

### 1. Command `init`

This is the default mechanism used to create new "projects".

Example use:

   $ fan build init hello

Example output (created under current working dir):

    hello/
    ├── fan.props
    ├── etc/
    ├── lib/
    └── src/
        ├── fan/
        ├── test/
        └── build.fan

Several directories and files are created:

 1. `fan.props`: this is an empty file that triggers Fantom to recognize this
    folder as a new `PathEnv`

 2. Directory stubs for `etc`, `lib`, and `src`

 3. A bare minimum `build.fan` build script.  See **Command `initpod`** for
    details on this file.

NOTE: No source files are created in this process.

### 2. Command `initenv`

This command is used to create a new `PathEnv` that will be composed of
multiple source pods.

Example use:

    $ fan build initenv hello

Example output (created under current working dir):

    hello/
    ├── fan.props
    ├── etc/
    ├── lib/
    └── src/
        └── build.fan

Several directories and files are created:

 1. `fan.props`: this is an empty file that triggers Fantom to recognize this
    folder as a new `PathEnv`

 2. Directory stubs for `etc`, `lib`, and `src`.  No pod source trees are
    created.  See **Command `initpod`** for details on how pods are added to a
    multi-pod project.

 3. A skeleton `build::BuildGroup` script used to build child pod source trees:

```
#! /usr/bin/env fan

using build

class Build : BuildGroup
{
  new make()
  {
    childrenScripts =
    [
      // child 'build.fan' scripts go here
    ]
  }
}
```

<!--BREAK-->

### 3. Command `initpod`

This command is used to create new pods under a multi-pod env.

Example use:

    $ fan build initpod foo
    Created src/foo pod source tree
    Remember to add 'foo/build.fan' to 'src/build.fan'!

Example output (automatically placed under `src/` regardless of current
working directory):

    foo/
    ├── fan/
    ├── test/
    └── build.fan

To specify a different path, the `<pod-name>` argument may be specified as a
path relative to `src/`:

    $ fan build initpod backend/foo
    Created src/backend/foo pod source tree
    Remember to add 'backend/foo/build.fan' to 'src/build.fan'!

Example of `build.fan`:

```
#! /usr/bin/env fan

using build

class Build : build::BuildPod
{
  new make()
  {
    podName = "foo"
    summary = "Description of this pod"
    version = Version("1.0")
    // These values are optional, but recommended
    // See: http://fantom.org/doc/docLang/Pods#meta
    // meta = [
    //   "org.name":     "My Org",
    //   "org.uri":      "http://myorg.org/",
    //   "proj.name":    "My Project",
    //   "proj.uri":     "http://myproj.org/",
    //   "license.name": "Apache License 2.0",
    //   "vcs.name":     "Git",
    //   "vcs.uri":      "https://github.com/myorg/myproj"
    // ]
    depends = ["sys 1.0"]
    srcDirs = [`fan/`]
    // resDirs  = [,]
    // javaDirs = [,]
    // jsDirs   = [,]
    // docApi   = false   // defaults to 'true'
    // docSrc   = true    // defaults to 'false'
  }
}
```

Note this command is only valid for multi-pod envs.  Users should be notified
when run incorrectly in a single-pod env:

    $ fan build init example
    $ fan build initpod foo
    Error: current env is not a multi-pod env
    Did you mean to use 'fan build initenv example'?

### Enhance Documentation

Maintain the existing content of `docIntro::HelloWorld` but rework to add in
`fan build` use:

    $ fan build init hello
